---
layout: post
title:  "on peaceful and noisy machines"
author: agnes cameron
description: "two new synthesisers"
date:  2024-12-29
tags: synthesisers
status: draft
image: 
---

This year I've been involved in the making of two different synthesisers. The first of these has been a collaboration with the electronic musician John Richards, of the Dirty Electronics Ensemble. The name of the project is _More Roar_. The synth is a digital frequency modulation synthesiser built using a STM32 microcontroller.

The second was made by me for a new performance by the Commission for New and Old Art (CNOA). The whole performance was called Valves; the synth was for a new piece called On Pendle Hill, composed by Oliver Vibrans. The specific requirement for this synthesiser was that it be made using a vacuum tube -- a _thermionic valve_ -- and the eventual design was based on a design by Look Mum No Computer called the _Safety Valve_.

In both cases, I've been thinking a lot about the political use and misuse of different technologies, a broad constellation around technology's militariness and the resistance to military co-optation of artistic work made using technical things. 


## More Roar

_More Roar_ was a project developed specifically in an artistic/educational context. In March this year, I invited John to come to the CCI to run a synth-building workshop for our students. I'd remembered going to one of John's workshops as an electronic engineering undergraduate, and experiencing electronics as this totally different, vibrant thing. I loved (and still do love) the maths and theory of electronics, but there was a liveness to the synth that we made that felt very different, and quite transformative.

John decided to use this as an opportunity to develop code for a new chip, and after the workshop asked if I'd be interested in developing it further into a project together. Much of my contribution to the project has been to write the code for the FM synthesis algorithm, and later the decay function that periodically adds noise to the signal. This was a very enjoyable process of writing some ultimately quite simple code. It's humbling to come back to microcontrollers after about a decade away and realise just how theoretical and ungrounded your engineering education was.

Microcontrollers are funny things, as they bring you much more directly into contact with control over a medium (movement of electrons around a piece of silicon) and in the process highlight just how far removed from the medium you yourself are. A lot of John's work that I really appreciate is taking these chips that cost about £2 and maximising the kind of sounds they can make. One thing lots of people say to me is, how does something that small make such a big sound?

We are still tweaking the code, but plan to release the synth early next year.

-- add some sounds here!

## Valves

Some of the initial ideas for the valve synthesiser came from a conversation with Sam Fairbrother of the _Commission_ a couple of years ago, where he asked me "Can you make a peaceful machine?" -- eg, is there a pacifist technology. I found the question very difficult to answer, and still do. It's rare to find 20th century technologies not developed either in or adjacent to a military context, a context that engineering and computer science departments are also embedded in.

_Valves_ as a performance circulated around the valve within brass instruments and vacuum tubes, as a unifying theme through post industrial areas of Northern England.

*On Pendle Hill* is a piece composed for baritone horn, brass chorus, valve synthesiser and clogs. The horn and brass chorus were performed by Troy Kelly and the Hebden Bridge Brass Band, with Lydia Philips and I playing the synth and Sam Fairbrother clogging. The piece also included an audio recording of Ellie Kinney, a peace activist, from the top of Pendle Hill, narrating her view of a landscape that contains multiple weapons factories.

One of the things the commission

A lot of the ideas about the synthesiser, and the machine, developed in conversation with Lydia Philips and Kat MacDonald

At the end of the program notes for _Valves_, we included a line "we'd like to think there's another way". In technical teaching, I think there's something important in showing that there are many ways to do things -- it helps to understand technical things as something not monolithic tools, but rather (to paraphrase a nice essay by Cristóbal Sciutto), a medium that one can have a degree of agency over.

STAT magazine wrote about the whole performance [here](https://statmagazine.org/staging-england/).

-- add some sounds here!
